# Faith For The Skeptical & Heretical

You are going to be told by science-minded people that faith in a religious God is irrational and therefore intellectually destructive, leading to anti-scientific beliefs and superstitions - not necessarily so. Your faith might not be useful in the context of scientific reasoning, but there is no reason for it to intefere with such if you practice it properly. It's a rather large topic, but a good start would be to ask: Why even bother?

## The Slight Advantage

If you say to me, "God is dead," I have to ask, "Which one?" I can invent gods as fast as you can shoot them down. Eventually you'll demand that we establish some clear definition of what "God" really means, and most people eventually arrive at: Purpose. In other words, suppose you get a telephone call from God, who says, "Oh yes, I am all-powerful, all-knowing, omni-this, and omni-that," and you ask, "All good and well, but... Why am I here?"

"You? Oh, no reason. You're just an artifact of creation, something that happens from time to time. Do what you like, I suppose. I have more important things to attend to, actually," and then He hangs up.

Well, then we *would* have to agree that God is dead, because this pseudo-God is useless to us in spite of checking off most of the deified checkboxes. Of course nothing like that has happened, but any proper atheist will point out the beauty of atheism: Without a God, you are free to *choose* your purpose and do what you like. And then I must ask, "Compared to what?"

Answer: *Purpose as dictated by The Church*. Atheists tend not to care whether God exists, but whether *The Church* exists. While there are many quiet atheists, the vocal ones see The Church as an oppressive & repressive political entity that seeks power over unsuspecting people in exchange for empty promises of an afterlife. Power leads to abuses of power, and there *is* some room for criticism here. It's puzzling that atheists tend to be so oblique about it, however. If the church pains you, criticize it, openly, and above all else, criticize it on moral grounds like the most accomplished atheist of all time: Martin Luther - no, he was not an atheist, rather an ordained Catholic priest before starting the Protestant reformation - but he successfully brought about extensive reform, so he *would* be the most accomplished atheist if he'd been one.

At any rate, no church is actually in charge of God. By definition God takes orders from no one, giving purpose to us, not the other way around. If you must ultimately answer to your God in accounting for your life, will The Church be there to back you up? If you met with disapproval, would you say, "Well, it's not my fault! I only did what they told me." We'd do well to be better prepared, to be able to stand alone (Christ notwithstanding, if you like). If it so happens that you and The Church agree, all the better, but even their religious dogma usually demands that *you* are accountable for *you*, which is a good principle regardless. I am just an opinionated bystander to you, and vice versa.

If we are adamant in our independent and individual view of divine purpose, is there really any *difference* between this and a purpose chosen in atheism? In fact the former has a slight advantage: Atheist purpose has to fit inside your own head, but divine purpose does not. You could have one, fulfill it, and die, never having been completely sure what it was. Your life might seem insignificant to every other person, even heretical and forbidden to some, and be of utmost importance to your God. Whatever divine purpose you might divine, it is actually up to you alone. In fact we have gained everything the atheist has, plus a special enhancement, regardless of the value others place on it. Who is more *free*, then?

## What Faith Actually Means

Suppose you are the divine, omniscient deity - a bit of a stretch, but bear with me - and you look down on humanity, seeing several people.

The first person says, "I have prayed long and hard for God to prove himself to me with a miracle, to distort and even pervert his own natural laws to a point that defies any explanation, so that I may believe. After much supplication he relented! I've not only turned water to wine, but walked on both! Miracles never cease for me, so God is real!"

The second person says, "That's nothing! God comes to me in dreams and visions. He speaks to me from burning shrubberies and small-to-medium-sized trees. He whispers in my ear. I can hear him now! He's telling me what to order for lunch (a Reuben, of course, with chips)! God is perfectly real to me!"

The third person says, "Bah, listen to you superstitious fools! *I* have chosen the most rational path, and analyzed all the writings of science and mathematics, poring over the equations and theorems and theories, and have *scientifically* proven God's existence! Not only that, but Einstein forgot to carry the 2! It is settled once and for all!"

The last person says, "I tried all of that and gave up. For whatever reasons, God does not reveal himself to me, scientifically or miraculously, but I decided to abide, to hope, to wager (like Pascal) that one day all of this will make sense, and do my best to live a moral and just life, to live up to my divine purpose, difficult as that is in light of divine silence. I hope that I will still find God one day, and that He approves of what I've done, because what more can I do, and what other choice do I truly have?"

So again, if you are the divine and omniscient One, the paragon of absolute certainty, you observe all this bluster and claims of certainty, and see what? They come off as poor imitations of yourself, some of them perhaps delusional.

But what of this last person, this one who has given up on certainty? What is this thing they have seized upon instead? It is something novel and unfamiliar, the singular characteristic that a perfect God cannot possess: Faith - *real* faith, a purest and perhaps *strongest* faith, without delusion, certainty or in-betweens. As a God of perfect certainty, would you marvel at this strange and most human thing?

Sure, we know all about those biblical characters who "walked with god," Moses, Noah, Abraham and so on. The disciples of Christ had the privilege of following him all over the place, watching him die, and seeing him resurrected. What of their *faith*? Let them have it and call it what they like, but we don't. Christ seems rather adamant that only the *certain* can have his salvation, to which we can only shrug - was he misquoted? Who would support that assessment, except the desperate? Here's to desperation, then. What else is there?

I have no need to deny the certainty of those who somehow come by it, then, but as for the rest of us, we can decide to occupy this rather lonely position of purest faith, because in a vast and possibly infinite universe of possibilities, overseen by a God possessed of everything a God should want to be, does this faith in fact *complete* that God's puzzle, a small emptiness which God alone cannot fulfill? Is that perhaps a fulfillment of divine will? Is *this* why God does not finally appear and resolve our own tragedies, for the sake of provoking purest faith? Perhaps this is all wrong, but it seems worthwhile to try in earnest, to make a perfect gift of one's purest faith, a gift that seems easy to give, to hang onto a thinnest thread that no one else seems to consider worth bothering, being so slight, dangling over the abyss. Should all else be lost, we have something that cannot be taken away by any person, and that's better than nothing at all.
