# Yes, You Have Free Will

The familiar and popular argument against free will - endorsed by some well-known scientists and intellectuals - goes as: First we assert that the universe is perfectly deterministic, which is to say, *predictable*, and *causal* - things happen as a consequence of other things, and if you can measure the right parts of a system, you can predict what that system will do. Second, we see that it is as if the history of the universe is already written; whatever happens is a direct causal outcome of what came before it, leading all the way to the end of history (if there is one). Finally, given that the history is already written, we can say that every decision you make is the only decision you *can* make, and so: *You have no free will*.

How does this argument against free will make you *feel* - perhaps as if someone cut your legs out from under you? In fact we've attacked your most fundamental sense of value, in both yourself and others. Most people find it very depressing. This leads to a crisis where people split into two groups: 1) If the intellectual leaders say it's true, it must be, so I resign myself to nihilism; 2) The intellectual leaders are crazy, so I resign myself to anti-intellectualism and anti-rationalism. Both options are terrible. To find a fix for this, we ought to note that our fundamental question is really about *value*, not free will per se, so *value* is really our benchmark when asking, "How do I get my free will back?"

People often try to defend free will by refusing determinism, using either of two arguments. The first way around is *magick* - or we could say, "divine intervention," so that unseen spirits of a non-materialistic realm render the world unpredictable by interfering in miraculous ways. Perhaps this "god button" is truly available, but we don't need it, so let's not push it - atheists need free will too (although apparently many of them don't want it...). The second way is to prove *true* randomness, since randomness prevents predictability. The latter has potential, but obliquely, not directly. In fact it's best to avoid hammering on the (apparently) pure randomness of quantum mechanics button as well, partly because endless controversy comes of that, and as with God, we simply don't need that button, real or not.

## Starting With Common Sense

First, a question: Does *trust* mean anything to you? How much does trust define your sense of value, in yourself or myself? Trust is one of the most valuable commodities we know of. However, for me to earn your trust is for me to be *deterministic*, to be predictable: You know that you can rely on me to do as I promised. But wait! We just decided that I am *perfectly* deterministic already - why would this trust be of such *immense* value then? Furthermore, should I stop being trustworthy to gain back my treasure of "free will"? Goodness no. Something doesn't make sense here. Rather than being automatic, this determinism seems to require persistent effort and honesty.

Trying a slightly different tack: We're advised that you are a puppet on a string, that none of your decisions are your own; so why trouble yourself with decisions, then? You should stop worrying about decisions since they've already been made per the certainty of determinism - right? But you're not that stupid: If you give up on decision-making, your future *will* be terrible.

Another angle: The condemned criminal says, "Judge, you have no right to sentence me to prison for a crime that I had no choice but to commit in a perfectly deterministic universe!" The judge says, "Sir, you have no right to complain about a sentence that I have no choice but to render in a perfectly deterministic universe!" We might as well play tit-for-tat-toe forever, or just accept that the criminal *can* change his mind about crime just as easily as the judge *can* change his mind about punishment. Both are equally restricted, or equally free, or equally somewhere in between. Our anti-free-will philosophy yields *nothing* of value to our actual judgement, since it is practically anti-judgement; it *annihilates* judgement.

I may insist to no end that my argument against free will from determinism is perfectly, logically sound, but you are entitled to insist that it leads to absurdly, obviously false conclusions. It would seem that we've wrapped ourselves up in a paradox. However, *we must not reject determinism.* It is the basis of our morality, which is in fact a *rational* morality.

Considering randomness again, should you *want* to be random, or at least *more* random, to recover some sense of free will? By and large, no. You live in a world that is chaotic enough already. Chaos is often described as "deterministic randomness" - a strange oxymoron - or "pseudorandomness". Chaos happens when there is enough complexity in a system to defy our ability to predict it without going to extraordinary means, but it yields results predicted by the mathematics of probability. To create chaos, we only need a pair of dice and a craps table. It's everywhere, all around us, and it *is* deterministic, but paradoxically approaches a "pure" randomness without achieving it perfectly. Your life's work is to achieve some order both within and *from* that chaos, *using* that chaos.

In the simplest universe, chaos dissipates, and life *is* pointless and predictable. What would you do there? You'd choose self-annihilation just to free yourself. Before deciding that your currently *chaotic* life has no meaning, consider how meaningless this simplest, most predictable universe is. If you're at all short on chaos, it's readily available in any free society - some old-timers would say, "Just have children!"

Having perhaps secured some *faith* in your sense of value, we can move on to hair-splitting.

## Paradox

The philosopher Zeno concocted bedeviling paradoxes about an arrow, a runner in a footrace, and then some, paradoxes that seem to indicate the arrow should not fly and the runner should not finish the race - but they do. Of course if someone shot an arrow at Zeno, he would *duck*, like any reasonable person; his point was that he seemed to be lacking some knowledge or understanding which could explain things.

It is incredibly obvious that your decisions *matter*. Nobody needs to tell you that. Acting as if you are merely an observer tagging along for the ride of history will get you in big trouble. If paradox says otherwise, paradox can ride in the back seat. Paradox declaims the incompleteness of our understanding, not the truth itself.

To understand our free will paradox better, first understand what science does: It does not compel or yield perfect omniscience; instead, science allows us to use imperfect understanding, imperfect information, imperfect theory and even imperfect calculation to *predict* an outcome with reasonable accuracy - and it works. Ultimately, science is for pragmatists, not perfectionists.

The free will antagonist is just as antagonistic to science itself: I insist that your entire life is perfectly predictable, but when you ask for that prediction, I refuse, and say, "Well, I could if I was omniscient!" But I'm not! No actual prediction is made, and no new information is revealed, just a claim of "I could." Nothing of scientific usefulness is revealed because no science is being conducted here. *I am claiming unttainable knowledge - on the condition of unattainable knowledge*. I can claim just as much value from an infinity of nothing.

The universe that gives you determinism also refuses to give you omniscience, as if one fact is conditioned on the other. Perhaps our free will paradox might help us arrive at some greater theory of information, causality and otherwise some day, but it will never get us to the forbidden ground of omniscient prediction. If the history of the world is already written, it is locked away where we can never get to it, and for all practical purposes it doesn't exist - as impractical purposes go, those can wait for you to recover your self-esteem.

## An Attempt At Real Perspective

We live in a strange universe that confronts us with the unfathomability of existence. At smaller, more pragmatic scales we can find meaning and create order, but at the greatest scales it is extraordinarily difficult, seemingly hopeless. This forms a *complimentary* contradiction to our deterministic desire. Some people, driven to madness by this contradiction, become delusional, claiming to unlock the fathoming puzzle; and others become nihilistic. Reasonable people learn to accept and balance this burden, knowing they have much work to do regardless. We can see this is as religious faith, if we understand that religious faith does not and should not compel amoral magick; existence is miraculous enough.

Rational understanding and action is part of your intrinsic value; doing the "right" thing means doing the "smartest" thing means doing the "deterministic" thing, which is to say, your actions are predictable rather than random. Of course we cannot predict your actions perfectly unless we have the same information as you, and your actions will be imperfect because your information is imperfect. There will be quite a bit of chaotic serendipity, in which accidents yield innovations. Imperfection abounds, and any proper artist recognizes imperfection as aesthetic beauty, a paradoxical and intrinsic gift, a second dimension of contradiction, a perfect imperfection. The imperfection of perspective is what *makes* you an individual instead of an indistinguishable dimension of an omniscient entity.

To be perfectly irrational is to be perfectly doomed; but to be perfectly rational & deterministic in any pragmatic sense is unnecessary, counterproductive, and impossible to begin with. Your job is to *balance* 1) rationality with 2) imperfection and 3) the unfathomability of existence. These are not equal or equivalent forces; they are - very roughly speaking - big, small and tiny.

Rather than obsessing over free will, obsess over *value*. How do you become a person of great value? Start with the rational, deterministic things: Be smart, observant, knowledgeable, reliable. Move on to imperfection: Be open-minded, flexible, forgiving. Finally: Embrace the unfathomability of existence as how things are meant to be, whatever that might mean, and make the most of it.

----

[Back to Ethics main page](./README.md)
