# The Human Animal

When I was a kid, the cold war was waning but ongoing, so George Orwell's book Animal Farm was mandatory reading for sixth-graders, as a sort of anti-communist manifesto; not that we understood the point, but it was entertaining enough. I never thought to ask, though: Why are the characters animals, specifically domesticated livestock?

It seems like Orwell recognized that the Soviet communists saw one another just about *literally* as livestock, entitled to pity and - metaphorically - some hedonistic bliss of grazing and reproduction, in exchange for a bit of everyday plow-tugging. The self-appointed leaders were hypocritical elitists who granted themselves special human status, per Orwell's famous non sequitir, "All animals are equal, but some animals are more equal than others." Seeing everyone else as cattle, enslavement and wholesale slaughter became an ordinary matter of state business, and then so much horror. Still, Soviet leaders like Stalin were idealists and true believers who were certain they had found the sure path to greater good.

Karl Marx hardly bothered with ethics; he mainly sneered at the idea, so it might be unsurprising that this becomes the weakness exploited by many adherents to his ideas about communism. Marx actually thought *capitalism* treated people like animals, and saw communism as the path to a properly "humanist" solution.

Many Americans in the United States view the bald eagle as a representation of their patriotic spirit, and romanticize all sorts of wild animals - wolves, mountain lions, and so on - as the embodiment of something not only *free*, but "free as a bird" - what, am I too an unashamed Lynyrd Skynyrd fan? You got that right. We love horses, but we adore *wild* horses, and recognize them as animals that readily adapt to a feral nature. This is a hedonic sense of freedom, a freedom from boundaries, rules and inhibitions, and as something natural, that if animals want to be independent and free, shouldn't I be just as much? The anthropologist calls us "domesticated" and that makes some of us downright *ornery*: Says you, smart guy. This ethic is core to rural and especially southern culture in the United States, and it's not wrong, nor is it some component of right-wing conservative ideology to be offended by, especially the bible-thumping sort - again, it's hedonic. There is paganism and heathenism afoot here.

The only problem with the wild-animal ideal is that our bald eagle cannot live up to an idea of "free will". They are purely instinctive, and in that singular sense *not* free to make moral choices. In religion we find a claim that humanity is created in "the image of God", a strange thing to say and probably best interpreted as a mental image rather than physical, even though we might also have some things to say about body as sacred temple and so forth. This claim is a way of elevating human beings beyond the level of animals, just to be sure we recognize the line between them and us. If we discard our religion, how do we manage to retain this separation? We have to see ourselves as *more* - not less (!) - than a pack of wolves.

So, especially beware those who treat us as livestock, but be wary still of others who treat us as wild animals, appealing as it may be. Those folks mean to do harm. Either view justifies violence that we'd otherwise forbid. What might seem like compassion and humility is contempt in disguise.

We balance our wild and independent nature against a God's-image self that recognizes a greater sense of right and wrong. If you commit to atheism, you need to find some analog for this, something that firmly fixes human dignity in place where it cannot be shaken loose. Perhaps it is adequate to demand faith in a principle rather than its literal expression, but it's challenging to separate the two.

----

[Back to Ethics main page](./README.md)
